Finding connection endpoints in ElastiCache

Your application connects to your ElastiCache cluster using endpoints. An endpoint is a node or cluster's unique address.

Which endpoints to use with Valkey or Redis OSS:

- For a standalone node, use the node's endpoint for both read and write operations.
- For Valkey or Redis OSS (cluster mode disabled) clusters, use the Primary Endpoint for all write operations. Use the Reader Endpoint to evenly split incoming connections to the endpoint between all read replicas. Use the individual Node Endpoints for read operations.
- For Valkey or Redis OSS (cluster mode enabled) clusters, use the cluster's Configuration Endpoint for all operations that support cluster mode enabled commands. You must use a client that supports either Valkey Cluster, or Redis OSS Cluster on Redis OSS 3.2 and above.

Valkey or Redis OSS (cluster mode disabled) endpoints

If a cluster has only one node, the node's endpoint is used for both reads and writes. If a cluster has multiple nodes, there are three types of endpoints: the primary endpoint, the reader endpoint, and the node endpoints.

The primary endpoint is a DNS name that always resolves to the primary node in the cluster. The primary endpoint is immune to changes to your cluster, such as promoting a read replica to the primary role. For write activity, we recommend that your applications connect to the primary endpoint.

A reader endpoint will evenly split incoming connections to the endpoint between all read replicas in the cluster. Reader endpoints keep up with cluster changes in real-time as replicas are added or removed. You can place your cluster's multiple read replicas in different AWS Availability Zones to ensure high availability of reader endpoints.

Note: A reader endpoint is not a load balancer. It is a DNS record that will resolve to an IP address of one of the replica nodes in a round robin fashion.

Valkey or Redis OSS (cluster mode enabled) endpoints

A cluster mode enabled cluster has a single configuration endpoint. By connecting to the configuration endpoint, your application is able to discover the primary and read endpoints for each shard in the cluster.

Endpoint format examples:

In-transit encryption not enabled:
clusterName.xxxxxx.nodeId.regionAndAz.cache.amazonaws.com:port

In-transit encryption enabled:
master.clusterName.xxxxxx.regionAndAz.cache.amazonaws.com:port
