Resilience in Amazon ElastiCache

The AWS global infrastructure is built around AWS Regions and Availability Zones. AWS Regions provide multiple physically separated and isolated Availability Zones, which are connected with low-latency, high-throughput, and highly redundant networking. With Availability Zones, you can design and operate applications and databases that automatically fail over between Availability Zones without interruption.

Mitigating Failures

When planning your Amazon ElastiCache implementation, you should plan so that failures have a minimal impact upon your application and data.

Mitigating Failures when Running Memcached

Mitigating Node Failures: Serverless caches automatically mitigate node failures with a replicated Multi-AZ architecture so that node failures are transparent to your application. To mitigate the impact of a node failure in a node-based cluster, spread your cached data over more nodes. Because node-based clusters do not support replication, a node failure will always result in some data loss from your cluster.

When you create your Memcached cluster you can create it with 1 to 60 nodes. Partitioning your data across a greater number of nodes means you'll lose less data if a node fails. For example, if you partition your data across 10 nodes, any single node stores approximately 10% of your cached data. In this case, a node failure loses approximately 10% of your cache.

Mitigating Availability Zone Failures: Serverless caches automatically mitigate availability zone failures. To mitigate the impact of an Availability Zone failure in a node-based cluster, locate your nodes in as many Availability Zones as possible.

Mitigating Failures when Running Valkey or Redis OSS

A Valkey or Redis OSS replication group is comprised of a single primary node which your application can both read from and write to, and from 1 to 5 read-only replica nodes. Whenever data is written to the primary node it is also asynchronously updated on the read replica nodes.

When a read replica fails:
1. ElastiCache detects the failed read replica.
2. ElastiCache takes the failed node off line.
3. ElastiCache launches and provisions a replacement node in the same AZ.
4. The new node synchronizes with the primary node.

When Multi-AZ is enabled and primary fails:
1. ElastiCache detects the primary node failure.
2. ElastiCache promotes the read replica node with the least replication lag to primary node.
3. The other replicas sync with the new primary node.
4. ElastiCache spins up a read replica in the failed primary's AZ.
5. The new node syncs with the newly promoted primary.

Failing over to a replica node is generally faster than creating and provisioning a new primary node.

When Multi-AZ is disabled and primary fails:
1. ElastiCache detects primary failure.
2. ElastiCache takes the primary offline.
3. ElastiCache creates and provisions a new primary node to replace the failed primary.
4. ElastiCache syncs the new primary with one of the existing replicas.
5. When the sync is finished, the new node functions as the cluster's primary node.

During this process, your application can't write to the primary node but can continue reading from replica nodes.

Recommendations

- Create serverless caches over node-based clusters for automatic fault tolerance.
- For node-based clusters, use multiple nodes in each shard distributed across multiple Availability Zones.
- Enable Multi-AZ on replication groups for automatic failover.
- Schedule regular backups of your cluster.
